 
Problem-Solving:
Proven Strategies to Mastering Critical Thinking, 
Problem Solving, and Decision Making
Table of Contents
 
Introduction
 
Chapter 1: Problem Solving
 
Chapter 2: Problem Solving Strategies
 
Chapter 3: The Problem Solving Cycle
 
Chapter 4: What is Critical Thinking? Exploring Various Aspects
 
Chapter 5: Critical Evaluation and Brain Mechanism Explained
 
Chapter 6: Applying Critical Thinking to Everyday Problems
 
Chapter 7: Improving Decision Making Skills
 
Chapter 8: Benefits of Improving Thinking Capacity and Decision 
Making
 
Conclusion
 
 
Introduction 
 
Thank you for downloading the book, Problem-Solving: Proven Strategies to
Mastering Critical Thinking, Problem Solving, and Decision Making.
 
In this day and age of cut throat competition, everybody is either trying to out-
think or out-do each other. Each and every aspect of life has now taken on a very
different dynamic and everything ultimately leads to just being a “contest.”
While running the race to win the coveted first prize, people try to apply as much
of their brain force as possible, in order to arrive at conclusive and advantageous
decisions.
If you are one of those who is finding it tough to match the footsteps of such
lateral and “out of the box” thinkers, then you have come to the right place.
This eBook will be dedicated to the cause of understanding the concept of
critical thinking, analyzing its various aspects and looking at the different ways
in which you can implement it to derive all its benefits. It will also provide you
with detailed information on problem solving – the problems that we face and
also the procedure to use. There are examples that have been stated across the
book that will help you understand the situations better. You will find that
problem solving, critical thinking and decision making go hand in hand. It is
only through critical thinking and decision making that we will be able to
identify a solution to any problem. These problems could be small or very big.
But the process of problem solving is fool proof and helps you identify solutions
with ease.
The chapters cover the different strategies that you could use to solve a problem.
There is also a detailed explanation on the problem solving cycle. This process is
usually used while working towards overcoming a problem.
Problem solving and critical thinking are usually directed towards managers and
supervisors in a company. However this is not true! Every human being faces
problems in life. This process can be used to deal with those problems as well.
The book will also look at your problem-solving skills and provide you with tips
to increase your brain power and utilize common sense solutions to solving
problems at an elevated rate.
This eBook will also help you improve your decision making capacity, and allow
you to make full use of your potential, in understanding how the human brain
works and how you can successfully improve your life by making the best use of
your mind power.
By the time you have finished reading this book, you will start to realize how
much more potential you have and be able to start to lay the groundwork for
implementing critical thinking in your life.
I want to thank you for downloading this eBook and hope it helps you improve
your problem solving and critical thinking skills.
Let us begin.
 
Chapter 1: Problem Solving
 
Problem solving is a term that every human being might have come across on
multiple occasions. Everybody states that a manager or a supervisor has to be a
master at problem solving. But this is not true! Every human being faces
multiple problems in life that he must try to solve. For instance a housewife has
to plan the expenditure for her house carefully. If she finds that she is running
short of finances, she must work backwards and see how she can overcome the
problem while purchasing the same amount of products for her house.
 
The process of problem solving is not relevant only to human beings. It could be
related to most living beings. It was found that there are cats living in the arctic
region. Its climate is terribly cold and there is barely any life in the region. There
are cats in the region though! Surprising is it not? These cats are lean because
their body burns the fat to keep it warm. It cannot last forever without food.
There are rabbits in the arctic too. These rabbits are food for the cats. The cat
cannot chase the rabbit all over the region. It cannot lose all of its energy in
chasing a rabbit that it might not catch. The cat actually analyzes the situation
and checks on whether or not it should chase the rabbit. It takes into
consideration the distance between the rabbit and itself. If it feels that it can
chase the rabbit and catch it, it goes on its hunt.
 
This is a classic example of problem solving. The problem at hand here is
whether or not the cat must hunt for the rabbit. The cat uses the basics of physics
in order to obtain a solution. The answer is very simple – yes or no. It is the
method through which the answer is obtained that is problem solving!
This method generally consists of using ad hoc methods to identify solutions to
problems of any magnitude. These methods though ad hoc are used in an orderly
fashion in order to obtain next to perfect results. A lot of these techniques are
used in computer science, engineering and mathematics. These techniques have
been developed through the techniques studied and used in psychology.
What is problem solving?
Problem solving is that term that has found its place in most fields. However,
each of these fields has a different perspective on what problem solving exactly
is. For example, in psychology problem solving would be defined as finding a
solution to any mental issues or processes where as in statistics it would be
defined as a method to obtaining a solution for a certain issue on how many fish
are there in a lake.
 
One must remember that the problems can also be categorized. These categories
would be well defined problems and ill – defined problems. Ill – defined
problems, as the name suggests are problems that do not have a clear cut goal. It
makes it difficult to come up with solutions to such problems. You might not be
able to identify an expected solution. Well defined problems on the other hand
are those problems to which solutions can be found easily. These problems have
well defined goals which make it easier to estimate the magnitude of the
problem and also identify feasible solutions to the same. We might also be able
to plan in advance if we identify such a problem.
 
When you are faced with a problem in any field, or even in your life, you might
either try to solve the problem through logic or by trying to interpret the
problem. No matter which method you use, you have to first understand the goal
of the problem and also try to identify the different routes you can take to solve
the problem. This is the key to problem solving! You might sometimes have to
resort to abstract thinking and try coming up with a creative solution.
 
For instance, consider that you teach a bunch of 10 year olds English. You have
to cover the different parts of speech in an hour’s time. You know that the
children that you teach have a low attention span. Your problem here is to grab
the attention of the kids for an hour in order to help them understand the parts of
speech. You could either go about teaching them in the regular manner by using
the text or you can make it fun for them! This is a problem where you would use
abstract thinking in order to find a creative solution. You know that your children
love games. So you can come up with a brilliant game that they will enjoy. But
ensure that this game also teaches them the parts of speech!
The Evolutionary perspective of Problem Solving
Everybody knows that the theory of evolution was stated by Charles Darwin.
What we do not know is that this theory was developed to understand why there
were so many categories of species that are found. It is also a very important
theory in psychology since it explains how different species were created for a
certain purpose. These purposes were often the goals that the species had to
achieve. Psychology uses these goals since it helps in trying to explain and to
predict the behavior of these species.
 
There are several components that are involved in evolution. The one that is
most common is natural selection. Natural selection is a process where a design
is chosen from a bunch of alternative designs depending on how it helps them
reach closer to their goal. It is because of this component that everybody has to
adapt to different situations. This is a major component in problem solving. The
later chapters cover the use of alternate solutions (designs) to help a person
achieve the goal – which is to solve the problem at hand. If the person finds that
the adaptation was useful, it is passed on to the next generation. When compared
to problem solving, the adaptations are the solutions which are passed down
depending on whether or not they have worked well.
 
Another main component is the method of sexual selection. This process has the
characteristic that individuals rival against people of the same sex and find
themselves attracted immensely to individuals of the opposite sex. The concept
of rivalry comes very often in problem solving. People might find it difficult to
avoid blaming one another when under pressure. However, this problem can be
overcome as well.
 
As mentioned above, every field uses problem solving and each field has a
different perspective on how problem solving works for them. This section
covers a few definitions of problem solving in four most common fields.
Psychology
Problem solving is used in psychology to try and obtain solutions to problems
dealing with mental health. It refers to the state where you desire to reach a goal
for a present condition that is close to the problem itself or near it or relatively
far off from the goal. You might use complex logic to understand the condition
and fill in the gaps if any in order to move closer to achieving the goal. However,
problem solving is part of a big whole. You will first need to find and understand
the problem and then try to give the problem a clear shape. Only then do you
move into problem solving.
 
Problem solving is considered to be the most complicated function to the
intellect. It is a process that requires the control over our cognitive minds and
also over our fundamental skills. In this field, problem solving has two main
categories – mathematical problem solving and personal problem solving. It is
the latter that is harder to overcome. Although the most common method of
problem solving that was used since the ancient times was mathematical
problem solving, many psychologists have found evidences to believe otherwise.
They believed that human beings use self – introspection, behaviorism and
experimentation to find solutions to psychological problems.
 
For instance, if a person is depressed, he could use either self – introspection or
experimentation to identify a solution to the problem. His goal is to overcome
his feeling of depression. Once he has identified his goal he can self – introspect
and try identifying the root cause of the goal and identify a solution for the same.
However, if he does choose to use experimentation, he would have to conduct
different social experiments on himself to identify the cause of the problem
leading him to uncovering the solution to the problem too.
Computer Science and Algorithms
Every software company that develops new software has to troubleshoot and
solve problems that the new software might have. In the field of computer
science and artificial intelligence where algorithms are the methods through
which the programs are designed, problem solving is a hero! However, it is not
the only process that people working in these fields have to do. They have to
first determine the problem that they face, then remove any duplication in the
problem, analyze and then solve the problem.
 
For instance if the programmers or developers find that there is a bug in the
coding of a new app, they will have to first identify the line at which the error
occurs. Once they find the error they will have to check if the error has occurred
anywhere else in the code. After identifying this they can work on solving the
issue that is at hand. It could be that the programmer did not have enough
knowledge and made the error. If that is the case, the supervisor or manager can
work on improving the programmer’s knowledge or can assign the coding to
another programmer.
Engineering
Problem solving in engineering is used to overcome product or process failures.
It is usually done to rectify the problem and also to ensure that the problem does
not occur again.
 
Problem solving can also be used to estimate a problem that might occur due to a
process or a product and find a solution to prevent it. For this you will have to
identify the problem and also analyze it before you move onto solving it or
mitigating the problem. Sometimes you might have to work backwards to
identify the cause of the problem. It could be a minor defect in the beginning of
the process or at the beginning of the manufacturing of a product. You use
reverse engineering to solve the problem. Other methods used are linear and
nonlinear programming and simulation.
Characteristics of Difficult Problems
Difficult problems are those that are ill – defined. They have some
characteristics that are typical. The following section focuses on those problems.
Lack of clarity
At times you might not know what the situation is. You might troubleshoot and
realize that the problem at hand is not the one you had to work on. At times you
might begin problem solving and might have reached a certain stage after which
you might not know where to go. The goal to the problem is not explicitly
defined making it difficult to identify a solution.
Multiple goals
There may be situations where there are multiple goals that you might have to
reach. For instance consider a company that manufactures soap. There might be
a problem where the different departments – production, sales and marketing,
accounting – might have different goals. The production department might want
to know what the problem with the quality of the soap is. The sales and
marketing department might want details on how better to improve their
advertisement in order to bring in more profits. This might create a problem
since each department might want their problem solved first creating opposition.
Multiple items, decisions and relations
Based on the example above, every department in a company has different goals.
These goals could either coincide or might be as different as night and day. It is
when they differ that problems arise. There might be issues where there is no
proper communication between the departments leading to problems with
allocation.
Time
When considering a problem, we must estimate the time for which the problem
might persist. If this is not done there is unpredictability and we will not be able
to find a solution to the problem. There might be different effects on the problem
due to external factors while trying to solve the problem. This may happen
immediately or sometime later in the future. In order to avoid drastic effects of
these factors on our problem, we must identify the dynamic state of the problem
and also try to analyze the different factors that affect the problem. In this way
we can avoid the effects of these factors on the problem, or prevent them from
causing any drastic effects.
 
When you identify a problem first check if it has the characteristics stated above.
If it does, then you will have to follow a different path in order to obtain the
solution. Usually, you will directly have to attack these characteristics.
Representations of a Problem in the mind
In the recent years, psychological research has boomed tremendously. This boom
has helped us distinguish between the external and internal representations of
any event that might happen in our lives. The first kind of representation is
linked to our emotions and memory. It is based on the knowledge that we have
and the structure of our memory. The latter is based on our knowledge of the
external factors like the environment – physical objects. It has also been found
that the information that is a part of the internal representations is usually
brought out through cognitive processes.
 
Problems are defined as models that represent the situation that the agent is
experiencing. In order to represent a problem, you will have to analyze it and
break it down into several smaller components to make it easy. These
components are:
1. Objects
2. Predicates
3. State of mind and body
4. The environment
5. The operators – the causes of the problem
6. How do we select the problem and the causes
The efficiency of Problem Solving is dependent on how your mind represents
any problem that you face. This representation is usually hindered by personal
experiences and beliefs. When you analyze the problem and change the
representation of the problem from one to another, you will find that you are
creating a space that helps you understand the problem in a new light. This is
called restructuring. Look at the example below to have a clear understanding
about restructuring.
 
‘There are two boys of different ages. They are playing badminton. The older boy
is a trained badminton player making him more skilled. Whenever the two of
them play a match, it is easy to predict who the winner might be. The younger
boy is defeated continuously and starts to lose interest in the game. Now the
older boy has a problem! He has nobody to play the game with. There are four
ways in which you can solve this problem:
1. The older boy can be nice to younger boy by letting him win at least one
game
2. The younger boy can agree to play another game
3. The boys could stop playing
4. The older boy can shame the younger boy into playing another game
 
However the older boy does not necessarily have to select the solutions stated
above. Instead of playing a game of competition he can agree to play a game of
cooperation. He can tell the younger boy that he will help him master the game
like he did. They could begin with simple shots. Once they realize that the
younger boy is not dropping any of the easy shots they can move to the harder
shots. That way the older boy is helping the younger boy learn the game better
and he has found a solution to his problem as well. Since this benefits both the
younger and the older boy, it is accepted happily.’
 
The important thing to notice in the above example is that the older boy
restructured the problem that he was facing. He understood that he had adopted a
wrong attitude in the beginning which made it hard for the younger boy to keep
playing. This is how representations work in the mind. We try to analyze the
problem deeply and see if there is any other way to represent the problem. You
might surprise yourself when you realize that the problem that you are facing has
a very simple solution. However, new representations can make problems
difficult or easy depending on the magnitude of the problem.
Barriers to Problem Solving
Problems are barriers themselves. But there are barriers that we might face when
we are trying to find solutions to problems. The most common barriers that
people usually face are irrelevant information, bias towards confirmation,
baseless constraints, mindset and fixedness to one method of solving problems.
The following section covers these constraints in detail.
Irrelevant Information
As the name suggests, problems might sometimes have information that is
neither relevant to the problem at hand nor of any importance to the person
solving the problem. This kind of information serves no purpose in trying to
solve a problem. It has a detrimental effect on the problem solving process. This
barrier is dangerous in its own way. While problem solving, you might not know
that the information provided is in fact not of importance. You might spend days
trying to analyze the information only to find that it has slowed you done and
has not brought you closer to the solution.
 
Consider a simple arithmetic problem. Let us say that you have been asked to
calculate the area of a room. You have been given the number of chairs in the
room, the number of people occupying those chairs, the color of the walls, the
quality of wood used for the door, the number of windows in the room and the
number of fans in the room. Most of this information is irrelevant. You could
probably use the number of chairs in the room to help you get an idea of the
perimeter of the room. But apart from that you cannot use the information that is
provided. Sometimes you might not even realize that this information is useless
to you. You might become solving the problem when you realize that it was a
waste of time. This is in fact a very simple example.
 
Consider a problem that is faced while developing software or after having
developed the software. The company might have spent a billion dollars on the
project. Assume that there is an error in the algorithm of the software. You might
have to use reverse engineering to identify and rectify the error. If the
information that is provided to you does not have the line in the algorithm where
the error occurs but information that is worthless to you, you might be spending
another billion dollars in order to rectify the problem.
 
Irrelevant information is a red herring. This is because of how the information is
represented. A problem has to be represented properly if we are to find a solution
to it. It could be represented visually, verbally, mathematically, statistically or
even as a book. But if there is irrelevant information provided, it might take you
a very long time to solve a simple problem. Sometimes you might not be able to
find a solution to the problem itself. Consider the Buddhist monk example. This
is a brilliant example on how irrelevant information deters you from finding a
solution and also shows you how the irrelevant information is provided.
 
‘A Buddhist monk begins at dawn one day. He walks up a mountain and reaches
the summit at sunset. He meditates at the summit for several days until one day
at dawn he begins to walk down the mountain. Making no assumptions about his
starting or stopping points, or about his speed of walking, prove that there is a
place on the path that he occupies at the same time during the day on the
journey up and down the mountain.’
 
This problem is one that is next to impossible to solve. This is because of how
the information has been represented. Since it is done verbally, we try to
associate an image to every word that has been stated in the problem. This is
very difficult to do since there is a lot of information that is irrelevant to the
problem. It is easier to understand this problem had it been represented visually.
That way there would be no difficulty in trying to understand the problem or to
imagine the scenarios. Had it been represented visually, it would have been
easier to solve the problem.
 
If you identify the perfect way to represent a problem, you will see that it is
easier to solve the problem no matter how difficult. Such problems are often
used to test potential clients. It is a strategy where the client is tested on his
ability to remove irrelevant information. You will have to master the act of
identifying irrelevant information. Only then you will be able to identify a
solution to the problem.
Bias towards Confirmation
There is a fundamental clause that a statistician has to follow. When a statistical
survey is conducted, he must try to obtain all the information for his hypothesis
from the sample without favoring any observation in the sample. He must
observe impartially and use the information that he obtains in order to find the
solution to the problem. It has been proved that any person following the above
theory obtains solutions with ease. These solutions are accurate and can be used
immediately to solve any problem. This method is not limited only to
statisticians. Every person in their respective field can use this. It can also be
done in your personal life.
 
This bias is usually defined as one’s unintentional need to corrupt the
information that is obtained. For instance, if the statistician has to conduct a
survey on the effects of smoking on life, he will first collect data. He could use
any method of collection – he could verbally ask questions, or have
questionnaires and schedules filled up. He might have a notion where he
believes that smoking causes death to the smoker and also to the people around
the smoker. He might try to lean his analysis towards that notion. This is done
unintentionally but might make it difficult to identify a suitable solution.
Mindset
This barrier was first stated by Abraham Luchins. He had deduced this barrier
through his popular water jug experiments. The experiment dealt with having the
participants or subjects fill a jug with a certain amount of water. They had to
achieve this by using three other jugs that were of different quantities. They
could only use these jugs one time each to fill the jug up. This was the first set of
problems that were given to the participants or the subjects. Ideally this problem
could be solved in a very simple manner involving a single technique.
 
After this step, Luchins gave his subjects another problem that they could solve
using the same methods that they used to fill the jug with water. They could
however use a simpler technique to solve the new problem. Luchins realized that
his subjects tended to use the same methods that they are accustomed to. There
might be other simpler techniques that they could use but they prefer to use the
methods that they are familiar with.
 
For instance, consider a mathematics problem. Let us assume that the students
have been given a problem on integration. They might be accustomed to solving
it in a certain method since they have been taught that way. However, there
might be simpler ways to solve the problem at hand. But when given this
problem, the students might choose to use the lengthier and tedious process since
they are used to it.
 
The mindset plays a great role when it comes to the attempt to solve problems.
We solve these problems using a technique that has been proved successful to us
over the last few experiences that we might have had. But this does not
necessarily mean that the solutions obtained through this method will derive
optimum or accurate solutions to the similar problems that we might face now. It
is ideal for people to think beyond their experiences and find solutions to the
problems they might be facing.
 
This was demonstrated by Norman Maier in 1931. His experiment challenged
his subjects to solve a problem using household tools – pliers. They were asked
to use these tools in an unconventional manner. It was observed that the subjects
could not view the object any differently from how they had viewed it over the
last few years of their lives. They had created an image of the object in their
mind and had associated a use to that object which prevented them from thinking
otherwise.
 
Most people avoid deviating from their mindsets. This phenomenon is termed as
fixation. Fixation is a psychological phenomenon that is an obsession with
strategies that have been attempted previously. These strategies are usually
unsuccessful in solving problems that are new but similar to the old ones. It was
revealed by Jennifer Wiley, in the late 1990s that people with expertise in a
certain field were bound to create a mindset. She conducted thorough research
and concluded that these people who were considered experts in their field were
in fact people with the problem of fixation.
 
Chapter 2: Problem Solving Strategies
 
We have covered the different barriers that a person might face when trying to
solve a problem. This Chapter covers the different strategies that can be used to
solve problems. However, it is not limited just to these. There are many other
methods. These methods are a few of the most common strategies that have been
used in the process.
 
Problem solving strategies are those steps that are used to identify the problems
that one faces while trying to achieve a goal. This is usually referred to as the
‘problem solving cycle’. The cycle usually begins with identifying the problem,
followed by defining the problem – the goals; try to identify a strategy that could
be used to decide on the problem, separate the relevant and irrelevant
information and land on an accurate solution. This is called a problem solving
cycle since problems keep arising. The minute you finish solving one problem,
you have the next problem right before you. This problem solving cycle is
explained in detail in Chapter 3.
The techniques given below are the strategies that are most commonly used
while solving problems.
Abstraction
Abstraction is a technique where the actual problem is broken down into smaller
problems. Each of these problems is first solved in order to find a solution to the
bigger problem. These solutions are first tested on a system. If the solution
works, it is applied to the real system. Another name for this technique is to
divide and conquer. This technique was used by most armies while invading any
country during the medieval period.
 
For instance, consider a mathematics problem on differentiation. The problem
here is to identify whether the function provided is a maximum or a minimum
function. For this, we have to find the first and second derivatives. Once we find
the first and second derivatives, we can deduce whether or not the function is
maximum or minimum. Here you have used abstraction to solve the problem.
You have identified your set goal and divided the problem into smaller problems
and used the solution obtained in those problems to solve the bigger problem.
Brainstorming
Brainstorming is a perfect strategy to use when there is a group of people
involved in solving the problem. This is a great technique since multiple
methods to solving a problem come up during discussions. Each member of the
group can see how the problem at hand can be solved. Based on their
perspectives, they can provide solutions to the problem. These solutions can be
combined and developed to form an accurate or optimum solution.
Hypothesis Testing
Hypothesis testing is a common statistical method where assumptions are made
to explain the problem at hand. The method works towards proving the
assumptions that have been made.
 
For example, we have to identify if there is a relation between smoking and lung
cancer. The problem here is to identify the relationship. The assumption
(hypothesis) made could be that there is no relationship between smoking and
lung cancer. The alternative to this assumption (hypothesis) is that there is a
relation. Since our main assumption is that there is no relation, we have to find
certain techniques to prove whether this hypothesis is true or not. That way we
will be able to identify a solution to the problem.
If there is no connection then we do not have to come up with further solutions.
However, if the hypothesis is proved false, we have to identify certain solutions
to reduce the effect of smoking on the lungs.
Lateral Thinking
Lateral thinking is thinking out of the box. The major barrier to this strategy is
the mindset. One cannot think out of the box since he is used to a certain method
of solving problems. Lateral thinking often obtains solutions which make the
problem seem very obvious.
 
For example, the production of soap was supposed to be 2000 per hour. Over the
last few days, the production dropped to 8o0 soaps an hour. Through the other
strategies you try to identify ways to overcome this problem and increase the
production rate. However, it is different in lateral thinking. The solution to the
problem might state that there is no harm in a drop in production since this
would mean that the quality of the soap has increased. This increase in quality
would mean a greater number of sales implying a higher profit. This would in
turn motivate the workers and the employees to do better!
 
Means End Analysis
In means end analysis you create sub goals in order to reach the final goal. You
try to bridge the gap between the initial state and the final goal state. There are
many examples to this method of problem solving that are very popular. One of
the best examples is the ‘Towers of Hanoi’.
 
While using this strategy you have to identify the initial state and also your final
goal. The initial state to this problem is represented by the first three disks of the
tower being stacked in the order of the size of the disk on the first peg, also
called the start peg. The goal is to represent these disks being stacked on the last
peg, or the end peg, which is the third peg. This must be done in exactly the
same order!
 
The rules to this problem are:
-
You can only do this by moving one disk at a time.
-
You can only move a disk that is on top of the stack
-
You cannot put a bigger disk on top of a smaller disk.
 
Since we are using the technique of means end analysis, we will have to first
create our sub goals. Below is one possible way of creating sub goals.
-
Move the disks that are on the largest peg onto the second peg
-
Move the biggest disk to the third peg
-
Move the other disks onto the third peg as well.
 
This can be applied continuously in order to reduce the magnitude of the
problem. You will finally come to a stage where you will only have to move one
disk to reach your final goal. You can use this strategy to solve problems that
you might face in your daily life as well – identify the correct train connection,
correct road map to follow to go on a road trip. You will have to identify every
aspect of your journey in order to reach your final goal. These small aspects of
your journey are your sub goals.
Analogy
Analogies are another common strategy to solve problems. Here similar
problems are viewed and solved. Using these solutions the problems that are
being faced now can be solved. A recent study was conducted where a song that
is stuck in your head was compared to an itch. You can only let go of the song or
forget the song by singing it repeatedly. That solution is something similar to
relieving yourself off an itch by repeatedly scratching yourself. This is also
called restructuring.
 
The perfect example for this is the radiation problem that was stated by K.
Duncker in the year 1945. When you have a patient with a tumor, you might
have to use radiation in order to get rid of the tumor. This ray is harmless. But
when the intensity of the ray increases, it kills the tumor inside the body but also
harms the other healthy tissue that comes in its way. The problem here was to
identify how to prevent the latter. When the experiment was conducted on a
certain number of subjects, they were asked to identify a solution to the same
problem. They were stumped and could not identify a solution. The problem was
then restructured. The subjects were told a story that went along these lines:
 
‘A General was looking at capturing his enemy’s fortress. He decided to launch
an attack at the enemy. He had a large army and was confident of winning. Then
he learned that every road that led to the fortress was rigged with mines. Only
small groups of men could pass through those roads without setting the mines
off. He then divided his men into smaller groups and then led the attack on the
enemy’s fortress.’
 
Here the General was compared to as the source of the problem, the enemy’s
fortress was compared to radiation, the fortress was compared to the tumor and
the big army was compared to the ray. The solution that was obtained through
this method was that the ray had to be subdivided into smaller rays which could
then be sent in without harming the healthy tissue in its way. That way only the
tumor would be harmed.
It was then stated that this strategy was a three step strategy:
Notice
You will have to try to identify or notice an analogical connection that might
exist between the source of the problem and the target problem.
Map
Once you identify the problems, you will have to map the attributes in the
analogous problem to the problem at hand.
Apply
You will have to then use the solution that was used in the source problem to
solve the target problem.
Proof
In this strategy you have to be pessimistic in the beginning and state that the
problem cannot be solved. You will then have to prove why this problem cannot
be solved. The minute you reach the stage where you find that it is difficult to
prove your assumption, you will have to begin solving the problem.
Reduction
Reduction is a combination of both Abstraction and Analogy. You will have to
break the problem down through abstraction and by using analogy you will have
to identify solutions to those smaller problems. Using these solutions, a
consolidated solution is found for the bigger problem.
Trial and Error
Trial and error is one of the most common strategies that are used to solve
problems. However, this is very tedious and might take a lot of time. Here you
will have to try and use all the different solutions that you might find to solve a
problem. You will have to see which solution worked best to solve the problem.
You might not find the accurate solution in the first go. The barrier, mindset,
might actually prove helpful in this situation. You can use all the solutions that
you are used to in order to solve the problem at hand.
 
Chapter 3: The Problem Solving Cycle
 
Problem solving is usually looked at from two perspectives. The first perspective
is that there is only one solution to the problem that is at hand. Mathematical
problems are a classic example of such problems. If you have an equation with
one unknown, you only have one solution. You cannot have multiple solutions to
solve an equation. This type of a perception is grounded by psychometric
intelligence. The second perspective is problems that have solutions that
constantly change. These are usually socioemotional problems. For example,
your favorite color is a problem since it changes almost every day and it might
sometimes depend on your mood. Another example would be what to get you for
your birthday. You might not know what you want or you might want so many
things making it hard for you to decide.
 
This chapter covers the general problem solving cycle followed. This is a
rational approach. You must remember that all problems cannot be solved using
this approach. However, this will help you get started and will help you work
towards solving your problem whatever it might be.
Define the Problem
Defining the problem is the hardest part. We usually tend to worry about the
problem before trying to identify what the problem actually is. We perceive a
problem, which might not actually be the problem and start worrying about it.
Instead, try to define the problem!
Defining the Problem with help from others
When you are trying to define the problem, you must ask yourself and others
involved in the problem the following questions.
a. What are the causes to the problem? Here you might not identify the main
causes as such but it is a start. You have to keep in mind that you are not
blaming somebody as a cause to the problem right at the beginning. The
person might be the cause, but see what led to that person being the cause
of the problem.
b. Where is the problem actually occurring?
c. How is the problem occurring?
d. At what times specifically is the problem occurring?
e. Who is the problem happening with?
f. Why is the problem arising? Here you will have to jot down the exact
details as to why the problem is occurring.
Finally, you will have to take a sheet of paper and summarize the above answers.
You could begin with “The following is not happening because of
_______________”.
Defining Complex Problems
This step also requires you to follow the steps a – f that have been state above.
However, since you find that the problem is overwhelming, you will have to
break it down and make it simpler. Repeat the steps a – f for these smaller
problems in order to define the complex problem as a whole.
Check your understanding of the problem
Since you are working with other people in identifying the problem, you will
find it easy to verify whether your understanding of the problem is the same as
your peers.
Prioritize your problems
We usually confuse important problems with urgent problems. Important
problems are those that need to be addressed first. For instance, while at work
you might be answering calls that you deem are urgent. Since these calls are
urgent, you do not necessarily have to answer those over important calls. In
order to help you answer these calls, you can create a system that screens your
calls. Most smartphones have the option where you can prioritize the contacts in
your phone and only receive calls or messages from those contacts when you are
busy. These are important calls.
 
At times, you might have to deal with multiple problems. You cannot work on all
the problems simultaneously since you would not be doing justice to either
problem at hand. What you could do is segregate these problems into the
categories of ‘Important’ and ‘Urgent’. This categorization is similar to that of
your phone calls!
Identify your role
It is essential that you identify your role in the problem. The way you perceive
your role in the problem greatly influences how you perceive another’s role in
the problem. For instance, if you are stressed out, you might find that everybody
else who is a part of the problem is stressed out. You might also blame
somebody else in haste. If you feel guilty, you might excuse another person’s
role in causing the problem. You might end up taking the complete blame.
Identify Potential Causes for the problem
There is a lot to know about things you do not know. Since you do not have too
much information about the problem at hand, you will need to use help from
your peers. You will need to understand the perspective of the people who are
facing the problem just like you are. People however might not be willing to
provide the information that you might ask. They might be influenced by others
making it difficult for you to gauge the cause of the problem. You might have to
obtain the information separately. You must write down your perception on the
causes of the problem as well. You can then compare the different perspectives
and then identify the actual cause or causes of the problem.
 
You must then clearly define the cause. You can follow the steps that are
provided to you when you are trying to define your problem. Repeat the steps a –
f to help you define the cause. This brings you one step closer to identifying a
solution to your problem.
Try to identify a strategy and a solution
Now that you have defined the problem and also identified the causes to the
problem, you will have to work on identifying the solutions. If this is a problem
that you and a group of others are facing, you can use the strategy of
brainstorming to identify solutions that will help you solve the problem with
ease. You cannot always use this strategy. If this is a problem that you are facing
on the personal front you might not want to involve any other person. At such a
time, you can use the strategy that you feel most comfortable with. The different
strategies that are commonly used are described in Chapter 2. You have also
been given examples to complex strategies that will help you identify the best
strategy that you can use!
Select the most feasible solution
You would have identified a lot of solutions to your problems through the
previous step. You will have to now select the best approach to solving your
problem. You will have to consider the following when identifying the best
solution to your problem.
a. Which solution will solve the problem for the short term as well as the
long term?
b. Are there any risks associated with the solutions?
c. Is it a realistic goal to use the solution to solve the problem?
d. Is it financially viable?
e. Do we have the time to solve the problem through this method?
 
If it is a personal problem, you do not have to answer the fourth question for
obvious reasons. You might find it strange to answer the second question too.
But you must realize that there are risks that we might face in life when trying to
solve a problem. There might be repercussions to any problem that might have
been solved using a particular method.
Plan on how to implement your most feasible solution
The following section helps you plan on how to use your most feasible solution
to solving a problem.
a. You will have to remember that there are two sides to a coin. In the same
way there might be two sides to a solution that is used to solve a problem.
The solution could either create a good effect or a bad effect. You will
have to carefully consider the consequences – good or bad – to the
solution.
b. What steps should be taken to use this solution?
c. Are there any changes that you might need to make in your systems? If
this is a personal problem, you might have to identify if there is anything
that you might have to change about yourself in order to overcome the
problem.
d. You will need to verify whether or not the steps in the solution are being
addressed. This is a check point for you. You will be able to estimate the
time in which the problem can be solved.
e. Do you need any extra resources? If it is a personal problem, you might
need to talk to a friend about the same. You will have to identify that
friend and see if that friend is available for you as support. You cannot use
resources that have crossed their lifetime. You can only use the support
that is stable and will provide you with the required output.
f. You will need to schedule your entire approach. You must identify the
time that you will take to solve your problem. Your schedule must time
box all your activities right from the start of the activity to the end of the
activity.
g. You will have to identify the person who is responsible for ensuring that
your plan takes perfect shape.
h. You will then have to create a separate plan for yourself in order to reach
your end goal. This is your Plan of Action and you will need to follow it
word for word.
The most important thing to remember is that you must observe this plan
continuously. You must be open to taking feedback as well. If they identify that
there is a certain aspect to the plan, give feedback and make the necessary
changes. You must also be open to taking feedback – negative or positive. That
way you will be able to come up with a fool proof plan!
 
You can also use the concept of SMART goals to create the perfect plan.
SMART is an acronym for
S – Smart
M – Measurable
A – Achievable
R – Realistic
T – Time Bound
 
This acronym helps you create goals with ease. The words speak for themselves
and do not require too much of an explanation. You can use this as an alternative
to create an easy and accurate plan!
Constant Observation
You will have to monitor the implementation of the solution closely. You will
have to create indicators at every step of your plan to identify your successes.
You can frame these questions at every stage to check whether you have
achieved your minor goals.
a. Are you happy with what you are receiving as an indicator? You might
have decided that if you have overcome a particular aspect of the problem,
you have achieved success in that endeavor. However, you might not be
satisfied after having achieved this. You might then want to change your
indicators. It is advisable to do it at this stage.
b. You will have to see whether your plan is going according to the schedule.
If you find that your plan is getting over before schedule it is a good thing
since you will be able to address other problems. However, if you find that
the plan is going over schedule, you might have to allocate more time. But
remember that this will change your entire plan of action.
c. There might be times when the plan might not be working according to
your satisfaction. You might have to identify whether the plan that was
decided upon was realistic and whether or not was time bound. You might
have to change your SMART goals. At times you might just have to time
box it slightly differently.
Check whether or not the problem has been solved
This is the final step to the problem solving cycle! This one step gives you all the
joy in the world since it bears the fruit of your hard work. One of the best ways
to check whether the problem has been resolved is to revert back to the regular
flow in the organization. Although the problem has been solved, there are some
aspects to consider:
a. What can be done to avoid similar problems like the one faced in the
future? Do changes have to be made to existing policies, technologies, and
work ethics?
b. Identify the learning from the entire process. You might have identified
solutions for problems that have not taken shape yet. You must keep a tab
on all the learning in order to safeguard your organization. If it is a
personal problem that you have overcome, you can see what changes you
can make in your behavior to avoid facing such similar problems in the
future.
Write a brief memo to keep the spirits of your peers and yourself up. Highlight
the best parts of the problem solving process and ensure that everybody knows
about it!
 
Let us now work on a personal problem. We will try to identify the process of
trying to solve the problems a person with a chronic illness faces on a regular
basis.
Problem Solving for personal issues
Now that we have covered the strategies and the problem solving cycle, we have
a good idea on how to solve problems. However, it is difficult to do so when you
are suffering from personal issues. You face a few more problems when
compared to the corporate problems. You will need to follow a systematic
method of solving these problems.
 
Take for instance your car. You know how to fix it when it breaks down. But do
you know how to communicate your fears to your family, friends and your
doctors? It is true that personal problems are usually hard to solve. But you can
learn to deal with them effectively. Let’s begin!
How does problem solving help with personal issues?
There has been tons of research conducted on how problem solving had helped
people suffering from personal issues. It was found that people were able to
focus on multiple problems without a fear of failure. They were able to work on
these problems and find constructive solutions to the same. Read on to find out
how this can be done!
Identify the problem
Like stated in chapter 2, the first step to problem solving is to identify the
problem. The main problem that you might face when you have personal issues
is that you might not be able to meet the demands of your family, friends, work
or your health. After having identified that try to see if you can describe some of
your observable behaviors. These behaviors can be changes to help overcome
the problem as well.
 
You must be aware that at times there might be more than one problem that you
might have to solve. These problems could be interrelated. You might find that
even after solving one problem you have difficulty since the root problem was
not addressed. You must aim to find the root cause of the problem since that
makes it easier for you to create a plan and progress towards achieving your
goal.
 
Look at the following example. ‘Adam and Eve have had a baby. After taking
care of the baby for three years, Eve wants to get back to work. Adam would love
it if Eve had a career but he is worried about child care. He feels that Eve should
not go back to work because it is not financially viable to spend on child care.
He is afraid that she might find him less interesting once she makes friends at
work. Eve senses Adam’s unease and does not bring her dream up after the first
time. She does not want to lose Adam. She starts losing confidence about
starting her career once again. But she brings it up when they face a financial
crisis. She states that they would not have been in this situation had Adam let her
go back to work’.
 
In the above example, there are multiple problems that could be identified.
a. No good child care
b. Difficulty in communication
c. Eve’s lack of confidence
d. The mismatched expectations
e. Fear of losing each other.
 
Adam and Eve might only identify the problem of child care and might work
around their finances to provide the best for their child. However, they might
continue to fight because of the latter issues.
Identify the Causes of those Problems
Now that you have identified the problem, you can try to understand the cause
behind those problems. The main cause of the problem here is finances.
Set goals
Sometimes you might be unable to identify the goals that you can set to
overcome a problem. You can always talk to people you know who have faced a
similar situation and ask for help. You will need to understand the perspective of
the people who are facing the problem just like you are. People however might
not be willing to provide the information that you might ask. They might be
influenced by others making it difficult for you to gauge the cause of the
problem. You might have to obtain the information separately.
 
You will have to ensure that the information that you are procuring from others
is not biased. It has to be valuable information that you can use. Discard
information that is irrelevant to you.
 
Set goals that will help you in overcoming the problem. These goals have to be
realistic! You can use the acronym SMART for this! Also you must consider
what you are compromising on. The goals that you come up with must not be
good enough. They have to be the best to ensure that the problem never comes
back.
Brainstorm
The next step was to identify a strategy to bounce around ideas to identify the
perfect solution to your problem. In personal problems, brainstorming is the best
strategy since you have another person to help you with ideas. You will be able
to come up with alternative solutions to the problem that you are facing. The
most important thing is that you generate multiple solutions. They rightly say
‘The more the merrier’.
 
You can also list out certain changes that you might want to make. You must
remember that these changes must help you in solving the problem at hand.
Since you are bouncing around ideas, you must reserve your judgment. You
should not reject any idea. The craziest idea might in fact be the perfect one for
you to use to solve the problem. It is great to involve others since they have a
fresh perspective. They would not be biased to either of you and might give you
the best solution.
 
In the above example, if Adam and Eve had talked to each other they could have
come up with a certain plan to overcome all their problems. Here brainstorming
would have been perfect since they would have a lot of ideas that they might
come up with that favor both Adam and Eve.
Choose a solution
You would have identified a lot of solutions to your problems through the
previous step. You will have to now select the best approach to solving your
problem. You will have to identify the consequences to all the solutions. You
should consider the long term and short term consequences that might affect you
and the people who are important in your life.
 
In the same way, you can try to identify a solution that Adam and Eve could use
to solve their problems. Once they brainstorm, they can select a feasible
solution. This solution must be financially viable for them since that is the main
cause of the problem.
Describe the plan
You must define your plan and time box all your activities. You should create a
schedule. While creating the schedule try to understand what the potential
roadblocks might be. Also ask yourself and others involved on how you can
overcome these roadblocks and if you could eliminate them what methods
should you use.
 
Identify the people who should be involved in helping you overcome the
problem. This person has to be someone you can rely on and someone who will
be committed to helping you achieve your goal.
 
When you are creating your schedule try to identify what your end goal is for
each aspect of your problem. You will have to have check points to see whether
or not you are closer to achieving success. Put your plan into place but always be
open to taking feedback on whether or not the plan is working successfully.
Review and Revise
You will have to keep a constant check on the plan that you have constructed.
You will have to have a rating scale that will help you measure the effectiveness
of the plan. You could have a simple rating scale of 1 – 10, 1 being the lowest
mark and 10 being the highest.
 
It is a great idea to keep a note of all the things that went well when you were
executing your plan. You have to also keep note of the things that made you feel
happy. Even if the plan was not the perfect plan, you might have made some
changes that have impacted your life for the better.
 
To know what to do better next time, you will have to keep a track of all the
mistakes that you might have made while executing the plan. You have to
evaluate the difference between your expected outcomes and also your observed
outcomes. It will help you plan better for the future. You can use the feedback
that you have received in this problem to help you overcome other problems in
the future.
 
Problem solving is a process that repeats itself. That is why it is called a cycle.
There might be occasions when you are standing face to face with the biggest
problem in your life. The first time you use the process might not fetch you the
results that you had expected. It might take you repeated attempts to identify the
perfect and optimum solution to the problem. However it is a good idea to keep a
track of your progress. You might have developed your mind into solving
problems with ease.
 
Remember that if the solution that you have designed does not work for you, it is
not a bad solution. Everybody learns through their mistakes. After all failures are
the stepping stones to success. You will be able to learn more and will learn
which path to avoid while trying to solve problems. Do not lose faith in yourself
but keep forging ahead!
 
Chapter 4: What is Critical Thinking? Exploring 
Various Aspects 
Before you start to look at the true meaning of critical thinking, it is helpful to
first have a look at how the dictionary defines the term.
 
“The objective analysis and evaluation of an issue in order to form a judgment”
 
As is apparent from the definition, the meaning of the word is pretty clear cut. It
stands for the in depth analysis of a problem in order to arrive at the best
possible solution in order to solve it.
 
So it is safe to assume that critical thinking is meant to be used as a tool to solve
everyday problems, regardless of their size and nature.
 
Here is another definition, to help you understand the concept better. This
definition is courtesy of The National Council for Excellence in Critical
Thinking:
 
“intellectually disciplined process of actively and skillfully conceptualizing,
applying, analyzing, synthesizing, and/or evaluating information gathered from,
or 
generated 
by, 
observation, 
experience, 
reflection, 
reasoning, 
or
communication, as a guide to belief and action”
 
This definition goes a step further and explains, in detail, the various steps that
are involved in critical thinking. It speaks of the various elements of
consideration, in terms of the number of things that you must consider, before
arriving at a decision.
So, to put it simply, critical thinking refers to a person observing a situation,
identifying the problem, analyzing it through the lens of experience and arriving
at a conclusive decision to solve it rationally.
 
It will allow the individual to arrive at clear cut solutions to tackle these
everyday problems head on and to solve them.
A critical thinker will have a data bank of the various problems and will only
have to think a little to retrieve the data, which will help tackle problem posed by
the current situation.
 
Critical Thinking and Intelligence
Critical thinking and intelligence are believed to go hand in hand. Unfortunately,
that is one of the biggest misconceptions in regard to the subject. Intelligence
refers to a person being extremely capable of solving difficult problems, just
with maximum use of his/her brain.
Critical thinking, on the other hand, refers to people critically analyzing a
situation and arriving at feasible solution, which may not necessarily be
prompted by intelligence. So the two thought processes can differ in many ways
and are not interdependent.
 
An intelligent person might have lots of memories, data and information stored
up, which he/she can immediately access in order to arrive at a solution.
A critical thinker might not have such data readily available and will have to
thoroughly analyze the situation and spend a little time in thinking of a solution.
Both aspects can be critical in helping a person attain an applicable solution to
the problem in question and it is just the process of getting there might differ.
For example, when presented with similar problems, an intelligent person might
think for just a few minutes and devise a plan to tackle the problem. A critical
thinker, on the other hand, might have faced a similar problem in the past and
will immediately put into action a preset solution to the problem.
Aspects of Critical Thinking
There are many elements that are part of the critical thinking process. Each of
them is explained below:
Arguments
The most important aspect of critical thinking is coming up with feasible
arguments. Arguments are nothing but premises and conclusions. Although this
is seen as being the last step, it is also one of the most important. A critical
thinker is required to set up arguments and draw logical conclusions from it.
Analyzing arguments
Once the various arguments are finalized, a person must identify the vague and
incoherent arguments. In order to do so, the thinker must view the argument
through the lens of suspicion and identify the solutions that are most vague.
Safeguarding the facts
The next step for a critical thinker involves identifying all the facts and making
sure that nothing has been left out. It will be important to safeguard the facts so
as to avoid losing any crucial data and also not allowing it to get mixed with
illogical arguments. Once all the facts have been established, the thinker can
safely move to the next step.
Evaluation
Critical thinkers are required to analyze if the existing premises point toward
conclusions. That is to say, if the premises hold any truth to them, then so should
the conclusions. They need to be interdependent and, more or less, extremely
similar in nature. If they are too vague, then that might cause problems during
the implementation of the solution.
Implementation
Once all the solutions have been arrived at through critical evaluation, viz.
evidence collection, argument formation, fact differentiation etc. they need to be
applied practically. This is one of the main steps, as no problem can be solved
without practical application of feasible solutions.
Arguments against critical thinking
Many people argue that critical thinking will diminish a person’s creativity as
he/she will always apply a preset or predefined solution. That will, in turn, not
allow him/her to think laterally, thereby not promoting creativity.
That is not true. No critical thinker will apply the preset solutions as is. They
will have to modify it to suit the current situation. There can never be a proper
and preset solution that will be readily available and only an outline or a skeleton
will be present. It will be the thinker's duty to fill in the muscles and the organs.
There is also the argument that states how critical thinking might throw a person
off course and cause him/her to complicate a situation rather than to solve it.
That statement, however, is also completely false. The very concept of critical
thinking is to help a person deduce the most feasible solution and not waste time
with unwanted ones. The process of critical thinking will allow a person to go
through all types of solutions and only implement the best one.
These arguments cannot possibly diminish the value of critical thinking and only
help in promoting its true value.
 
Chapter 5: Critical Evaluation and Brain Mechanism 
Explained 
 
In the previous chapter, we looked at the meaning and the various aspects of
critical thinking and in this chapter; we look at the process that occurs during
critical thinking.
Before we look at the very process itself, it is important for you to understand
that this is just a generic structure and it can differ from person to person. This
explanation is only to help you start with the process and allow you to
implement it on a daily basis. It is only through regular practice that you will be
able to become a bona fide critical thinker.
Recognition
The first step involves recognizing the problem. When presented with a
situation, it is for you to understand it and pinpoint the actual problem. Many
times, the problem might not be apparent or it might have a deep rooted
connotation. So you have to decide on what the problem truly is and, if it is not
too apparent, then what you must do to find out. You might have to make use of
certain tools that will be in your power such as vision, hearing, etc. Once you
successfully recognize the problem, you have to prepare yourself for the next
step.
Analysis
The next step of the process is for you to analyze the problem. You have to
interpret it in a manner that will allow you to understand it thoroughly and also
make way for you to dissect it. Only through dissection will you be able to make
sense of it and thoroughly understand its various dynamics. If you simply
identify the problem and start to apply solutions in general terms then it will be
useless. You might waste time in doing so and so, it will be important for you to
completely and thoroughly analyze and understand the problem. And this simply
has to be a follow up to the first step, as it will be critical for you to follow a set
pattern every single time.
Gather information
The next step will require you to gather all the pertinent information in regard to
the problem. You might have to go to the extent of acquiring both primary and
secondary data and then make a comprehensive set of data. The information
must be pertinent to the situation and the problem and you must avoid collecting
and gathering data that will not be of any use to the situation, thus recognizing
data that is only vaguely related to it.
At the same time, you have to also try and collect lateral data that will allow you
to question the truth and thereby strengthen your analysis. So don’t be shy to
collect data that will be abstract in nature.
Logical analysis
Once you gather the information, you have to apply your mind to it and
practically try and apply the solutions to the recognized problems. All the data
that is collected needs to be interpreted thoroughly so as to allow you to arrive at
feasible and situation-specific solutions. Again, the solutions must be specific
and not generic. For example, if a baker wants to expand his business, then he
must ideally invest in more equipment as opposed to expanding the size of his
physical shop. All the data that is collected must be put to use as the dynamics of
the solution can vary depending on the amount of data that is analyzed.
Arguments
One of the most important aspects of critical thinking is devising arguments.
Arguments are nothing but a set of statements, with one being the solution and
the rest being premises to it or mere assumptions. It is the critical thinker’s duty
to surmise which statement is the solution and which one is a mere assumption.
Decision making
Once all the solutions have been obtained, after careful analysis and practical
application, only the best solutions must be finalized. You have to make the
decision of finding the best solutions and also use bona fide foresight. You have
to be able to tell the consequences that your actions will have and know how
effectively you will be able to solve the problem. You have to be able to draw
conclusions and analyze them through a logical lens. As much as you would like
to take a risk, it is better that you only choose the solution that will garner sure-
shot results.
Dedication
Once you devise the solution to the problem, you have to be quick in
implementing it. What is the point in wasting time, once you have the solution in
your hands? You have to put all your solutions and conclusions to the test and
not stop until the results are apparent and are satisfactory. If you stop half way,
then you will end up losing out on the chance of successfully beating out a
problem.
Question
Once the problem is successfully solved, you can start to create a data bank in
your mind. But before you do so, you have to question yourself on whether what
you implemented was the best solution and whether you are satisfied with the
time that it took. If you are, then you can store the information as is, but if you
feel that you could have gone about it in a smoother manner and in a quicker
time, then you must alter the incident and store the data as an edited version.
 
Chapter 6: Applying Critical Thinking To Everyday 
Problems 
 
It is important for you to apply critical thinking on a daily basis, in order to
successfully turn it into a habit. In this chapter, we look at the various ways in
which you can make the most of your everyday problem solving and try and
practice critical thinking on a daily basis.
Make the best use of time
Make the best use of the time that you have on your hands. Most people do not
realize how much they are wasting their time. They tend to watch television,
listen to music or play games. Instead of doing all that, just by sitting down for
an hour and looking back at the day that has passed, can help in the process of
developing critical thinking. Doing this on a daily basis will help you identify
your strengths and your weaknesses.
Tackle one thing at a time
When you analyze your daily activities and identify your strengths and
weaknesses, you must try and tackle one problem at a time. Start by listing out
all your weaknesses and tackling them one at a time. Once you find that you are
able to conquer your weaknesses, work on your strengths. Your strengths should
be in terms of your capacity in performing critical thinking and being able to
take rational decisions. You must try and build arguments for the various
situations and problems in your life.
Step by step approach
You were made aware of the various aspects of critical thinking in chapter 1 and
were also exposed to the mechanism that the brain employs while making
rational decisions. Thus, in order to establish the habit of critical thinking, you
must practice each step. Try and concentrate on the observational aspect for a
week and then move on to the process of building arguments and so on and so
forth. Make sure that you practice on everyday problems and mundane
situations.
Record your progress
Maintain a book and record your progress. One of the best ways to keep yourself
motivated is to maintain a book. Record your progress by analyzing a situation
and how you tackle a problem. Write down a step by step guide for easy
reference and you will start to see an apparent difference as time passes. Write
down a lesson at the end of each page so as to understand the right and the
wrong approaches that you have learned.
Modify your habits
You must modify your daily habits in order to incorporate critical thinking.
Consciously make time for the habit and try to spend some time on a daily basis
trying to improve your thinking capacity. Understand your forte and try to
indulge in diverse activities.
Tackle your autopilot mode
You must learn to tackle your auto pilot mode and try to stop taking unconscious
decisions. Before you arrive at a solution and implement it, spend some time to
evaluate whether you are subconsciously taking the decision. If you are, then
analyze the situation again and apply critical thinking. You have to try and have
a control over your mind to the highest possible level in order to think critically,
every single time.
Change perspective
You must change your perspective every now and then. When faced with a
problem that involves another person, try and think of it from their point of view
as well. That will allow you to arrive at a decision at a faster pace. For example,
if you are fighting over something and have reached deadlock then try to think
from the other person’s perspective, in order to find the most feasible and fast
solution. That way, you will derive dual benefits. Not only will you save time but
you will also be able to increase your critical thinking skills.
Be reasonable/ practical
In all of your critical thinking practice, you have to be reasonable and practical
to the farthest extent. Although it is advised for you to make a list of all abstract
solutions as well, just to build a counter argument to your feasible solutions, it is
recommended that you be as reasonable as possible. If you assume that by
thinking in extremes, you will be able to devise quick solutions that will not fail
you then you might be thinking wrongly. Although critical thinking does
encourage creativity, it does not do it to an extent that allows you to be vague.
You have to work within acceptable limits and be able to find contradictions,
which will help you deduce the right solution.
Have a partner
When you take up something new, it is advisable that you have a partner to assist
you. Not only will you remain motivated but also have the opportunity to enact
the various problems and help find feasible solutions. And if you do it with
someone that you love or who loves you like a life partner or best friend, then
you will help each other develop mental sharpness.
 
Chapter 7: Improving Decision Making Skills 
 
In this chapter, we focus on how you can improve your decision making skills.
One thing that is worth bringing to your notice is that your critical thinking
capacity and decision making capability will only improve if you make the most
of your brain. And in order to do so, you can apply either a direct or an abstract
approach.
The following are a combination of both these approaches, where some will
directly improve your decision-making skills and some will have an indirect
bearing upon them. You must practice each one on a daily basis, in order to reap
its full benefits.
Distraction
When faced with a problem or a decision-making opportunity, you must
simultaneously look for a distraction. The distraction will help you concentrate
better on the problem. The distraction should be within limits and allow you to
unwind. It can be a hobby like painting or something that will have a therapeutic
effect on you. You can also join a class like a dance or opera class and as long as
it will allow you to completely cut out the problem for a few hours; you will help
sharpen your decision and thinking skills.
Learn new languages
One of the best things that you can do to improve your decision making skill is
to learn a new language. As vague and abstract as that may sound, it has
scientific backing. When you learn a new language, your brain starts to grow
bigger and, in turn, allows you to think better. And when you think better, you
automatically start to make better decisions. Make sure that you learn a foreign
language as opposed to a local one. Try to start with a simple one and then move
to a tough one like Mandarin. Make sure that you learn 1 new language a year
and avoid going for too much too soon.
Exercise
You must exercise on a daily basis, in order to cut down on the level of cortisol
in your brain. Cortisol is the chemical that can cause you to undertake stress,
which can, in turn, affect your decision-making capacity. You have to try and
work out for at least 30 minutes a day and try to keep it as varied as possible, to
avoid monotony. You can try cardio one day, lift weights, take up swimming,
perform aerobics etc. You must also take a couple of days off, otherwise you
might overdo it.
 
Diet
You must consume a balanced diet, in order to develop a good critical thinking
and decision making capacity. Make sure you eat lots of fresh fruits and
vegetables. You must also incorporate at least 8 glasses of water a day or balance
it out by consuming juices. Try and avoid buying processed foods, as they will
contain unsaturated fats, which can cause your body more harm than good. You
must also avoid consuming junk foods, as they will also contain fats and
unhealthy ingredients, which can cause your brain to secrete cortisol. Try to
make your own junk food substitutes as much as possible.
Meditate
Meditation is a great way for you to relax your mind. If you wish to be a critical
thinker and also be able to take timely and important decisions, then you must
meditate or take up a relaxing stance. Meditating can help improve your memory
power and also keep stress and tensions at bay. You can improve your mind’s
capacity for analyzing a situation and coming up with bona fide solutions and
conclusions. That will allow you to turn into a proficient thinker and also help
you be a calmer and more rational person.
Social life
In order to have increased mental development, you have to have an extensive
social life. You have to have a big friend circle and also try and have friends of
all ages. When you interact with such a wide group of people, you develop the
tendency of thinking at all levels. You will be capable of understanding and
analyzing a situation from the various lenses and be able to set a large argument
base. You can indulge in small talk with strangers, in order to expand your social
circle.
Read
To be very honest, this is one of the most ideal ways for you to expand your
mental capacity. You have to read on a daily basis, in order to understand the
various ways in which you can increase your potential. You must read the
newspaper daily and be up to date with all the latest news. You must also read
books of all genres. You can join a book club in order to keep you motivated and
meet other readers and openly propagate your thoughts and opinions. You can
also read a book in a foreign language, which will keep you more concentrated
on the subject matter.
Explore
You have to travel around, in order to expand your mental horizons. How can
you live under a rock and be intelligent? You have to get out there and explore
the world. You must make the effort of going to the various places the world has
to offer and try understanding each and every culture you come across. You can
also take your family along; as it will help you establish a better bond. When you
feel connected with them, you feel relaxed and rest assured that come what may,
you will always have their support. That assurance will allow you to take risks
and arrive at better decisions.
 
Chapter 8: Benefits of Improving Thinking Capacity 
And Decision Making
 
Now that we have looked at the various things that you can do on a daily basis to
improve your decision-making skill, it is worth looking now at the benefits of
utilizing critical thinking in problem solving.
Professional benefits
Idea building
Critical thinking can help in building new ideas. Say, for example, a new
problem arises at your workplace. By employing group critical thinking you can
come up with a lot of solutions, which will help in the formulation of arguments.
Once the arguments are analyzed, you can zero in on the best solutions. Slowly,
you will create an effective databank and be able to solve problems at a faster
pace on a daily basis, thereby increasing your productivity.
Team work
Critical thinking can help build teamwork. When a problem arises, everybody
will have to discuss and determine the various ways in which that problem can
be tackled. When such group meetings occur, people are bound to grow closer.
Teamwork building will help everybody that is involved and help you to find
answers that suit the team.
Progress
No company will stagnate when the workers employ critical thinking. There will
be no room for monotony as creativity will be encouraged every time that there
is a problem. The company is sure to progress and so will the company
employees.
Client building
By providing meaningful and feasible solutions to your clients, you will increase
your customer base. And by doing so, you will increase your profits and allow
your business to grow. Your customers and clients will be appreciative of your
lateral and “out of the box” thinking methods in providing them with quick
solutions and, through word of mouth, your business will grow.
Social
Better compatibility
Critical thinking can promote open mindedness. With such an attitude, it will be
easy for people to get on together. Society will come together as an entire unit
and try and find feasible solutions to the various problems that arise.
Compatibility is one of the main factors that determines whether a society can
survive and progress together and through the implementation of critical
thinking and subsequent problem solving, it will be extremely easy to establish
compatibility. There will be less fights and more progress.
Bigger reach
When you apply critical thinking and solve problems, people will take an instant
liking towards you. You will be much appreciated and your friend circle will
grow. You will start to make friends with people at all levels, which can, in turn,
improve your professional life as well. You can also attain a very influential
position and can command a lot of respect. You will drive away any negativity
and allow only positive people and circumstances to surround you.
Personal
Less misunderstandings
When you have critical thinking as an option, you can help avoid fights and
distance misunderstandings. With fewer problems on the home and personal
front, you will be able to concentrate better in your workplace. It will help you in
increasing your productivity and making the most of your intelligence. You will
not have to worry about going back to people who do not understand you and,
just by thinking from their perspective every now and then, you will be able to
help them look from yours. And with such compatibility, you will remain
motivated to practice more and more critical thinking and apply it to all the
various problems in life, small and big.
Better genes
If you include the habit of critical thinking into your life on a daily basis, then
you can imbibe it in your genes. And once it is completely imbibed and a part
and parcel of your DNA, then you will pass it on to the next generation. You will
help your children and grandchildren develop the same habits as you and thereby
create a bright future for them. And if you can get your partner to join in and
practice critical thinking on a daily basis, then you will double the chance of
your kids developing the habit and consequently leading better lives.
 
Conclusion 
 
I thank you once again for downloading this eBook and hope you had a good
time reading it. As is apparent, the book’s main aim was to propagate the idea of
lateral and critical thinking and showing you how you can solve your problems
on a daily basis. The idea is to also help you understand the process of problem
solving. There is a chapter that gives you the steps that you can follow to
overcome any problem. Under the same chapter you have been given an
example which shows you how you can solve the problem of facing a chronic
disease.
At times you might be the only one facing a problem and might not want
everybody to see that you are uncomfortable or are deeply affected by the
problem. Problem solving saves the day during such situations. These problems
can be large or small but as long as they are helping you to find feasible
solutions, you will be required to tackle them with rationality. That is where you
will be required to put on your critical thinking caps. Problem solving and
critical thinking go hand in hand. It is only when you think creatively or out of
the box that you will be able to identify a solution to the problem.
As we saw in the first portion of the book, critical thinking is the process of
observing a situation and arriving at feasible solutions to the problems that are
part of that situation. It stands for the entire process of decision-making starting
right from observation of a problem and ending with a conclusion.
The rest of the book was focused on understanding the process of critical
thinking and how you must apply them in your day to day life, and included how
you can successfully improve your decision making capacity as well as how it is
possible to alter it through direct and indirect means.
Finally, we shed some light on the various ways in which you can benefit from
critical thinking and solve problems in your personal, social and professional
lives.
I hope you make the most of all the information that was provided in this book
and also try and act on it immediately. It is also hoped that you increase your
level of thinking and develop the confidence of solving any problem with
rationality and increase your productivity at the same time.
Good Luck!
 
 
Free Bonus Video: Improve Your Problem Solving
Skills
 
Life is a series of problems to be solved and difficulties to overcome. Your
problem solving abilities are essential to getting paid more and promoted faster.
Success is the ability to make a decision and achieve an ideal solution.
Bonus Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1lt6pwIF1o
 
 
Checkout My Other Books:
• http://www.amazon.com/Body-Language-
Understanding-Communication-Encounters-
ebook/dp/B00U3DHO7G/ref=sr_1_9?s=digital-
text&ie=UTF8&qid=1427561246&sr=1-
9&keywords=body+language
• http://www.amazon.com/Emotional-Intelligence-
Increase-Mastering-Communication-
ebook/dp/B00VC8HM5K/ref=sr_1_12?s=digital-
text&ie=UTF8&qid=1427659047&sr=1-
12&keywords=emotional+intelligence
